# Water-Mass-Atlas
GES Undergraduate Thesis Project 


Oceanographers study mode waters to observe their formation, movement, and interaction with other water masses, as these processes play a critical role in global heat and carbon transport. Since mode waters ‘move’ in 3D throughout the ocean, having a three-dimensional plot to observe these waters will provide a truer representation of their spatial distribution, depth variations, and pathways, as opposed to the limited perspective offered by a two-dimensional plot. It is critical to use visual models that pay respects to the reality of ocean circulation. As part of oceanographic data-base validation and verification, virtual environment visualization of 3-D surfaces provides a way to quickly analyze enormous ocean areas. Any and all evaluation strategies are required to preserve the best quality environmental information, and 3-D visualization is a potential new 3-field evaluation tool (Head et al., 1997). Tracking mode waters and their work to cycle nutrients throughout the ocean will reveal where the most production takes place; information that will be critical to sustaining a fisheries longevity, and with that the national economy that relies on fisheries for their societies to function (Jörn, 2019). In this project, we will discuss the creation of a platform where each mode water can be observed through 3 dimensional visualizations and the data used to model each mode water. This visualization helps the viewer observe how each variable within the mode water is changing based on depth, latitude, and longitude. Conveying these changes on a two dimensional plot may be challenging as the observer will not be able to perceive the role depth along the y plane and movement across the z and x plane have on the circulation pathway just from the figure itself.  By observing mode waters and their circulation pathways, scientists are able to quantify how greatly effects such as climate change may have on marine physical processes such as the oceans conveyor belt. Given there is minimal understanding of the complexities that contribute to this mechanism, it is critical to use visual models that represent the reality of ocean circulation. Having a 3 dimensional model allows for careful analysis since adding an extra dimension adds emphasis to spatial and temporal variability parameters that might be lost within a 2 dimensional model that lacks depth. 


The scripts in this repository were used to create the 3 dimensional watermass atlas. Script xx creates the figures used in each watermass movie to observe an acurate flow of water properties in the ocean. Script xx (ffmpeg) will work to represent the ocean as acurate as to how the system circulates within the ocean. Script xx creates figures of water property concentriaions next to the anomoly of thoes concentrations. These figures show data seperated into 10 year increments whin gridded bins. 


M. E. M. Head, Phu Luong, J. H. Costolo, K. Countryman and C. Szczechowski, "Applications of 3-D visualizations of oceanographic data bases," Oceans '97. MTS/IEEE Conference Proceedings, Halifax, NS, Canada, 1997, pp. 1210-1215 vol.2, doi: 10.1109/OCEANS.1997.624168.

Schmidt Jörn O. et al., Future Ocean Observations to Connect Climate, Fisheries and Marine Ecosystems, Frontiers in Marine Science, Vol. 6, 2019, https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/marine-science/articles/10.3389/fmars.2019.00550
